
A new multidimensional model of writing for research

publication: An analysis of disciplinarity, intra-textual variation,

and L1 versus LX expert writing

Taha Omidian a,*, Anna Siyanova-Chanturia a,b, Douglas Biber c

1. Introduction

Over the past four decades, writing for research publication has been an active area of research in various lines of inquiry within the field of applied linguistics. One major reason for this long-standing interest is the preeminence of this particular form of knowledge communication in the modern academic system. Research publication in the form of journal articles is now the primary objective of most academic institutions, involving more than eight million researchers across the globe (see Ware & Mabe, 2015). Another reason for this specific research interest is perhaps the unique challenges involved in communicating scientific knowledge through the medium of writing for research publication. These challenges are mainly related to the distinct linguistic characteristics of this particular genre of writing. A prototypical example of such characteristics is the extensive use of nouns, nominal phrases, and embedded phrasal structures, which results in the highly compact and informational discourse of academic 
research prose (see Biber & Gray, 2016).

Gaining control of this unique prose style requires a nuanced understanding of the linguistic particularities that characterize research writing and set it apart from other written genres. Developing such a specialized competence, however, usually demands prolonged exposure to the norms and conventions that govern such linguistic differences (see e.g., Romer, 2009). This protracted development often poses major challenges to those who wish to participate in scholarly activities in their fields but have yet to acquire the discourse competencies required for such a feat. These challenges are further compounded by the heterogeneous nature of knowledge production across academic fields. That is, the norms and conventions of research writing can be differentially affected by those of disciplinary communities and their routine scholarly practices. Thus, writing for research publication seems to involve facing the dual task of mastering a particular mode of knowledge communication while gaining familiarity with the 

linguistic demands associated with disciplinary conventions.

Research in this area has focused on investigating frequently used lexical and grammatical features that distinguish conventional discourse practices in research writing. The rationale behind this research agenda stems from the premise that certain lexical and grammatical devices serve particular communicative functions which are often characterized by conventional discourse and community-specific practices. This body of research has been guided by two main approaches. One approach has been to investigate the lexico-grammatical markers of a particular communicative function in research writing (e.g., Afros & Schryer, 2009; Charles, 2006,

2007; Groom, 2005; Hyland, 1998; Hyland & Tse, 2005). In this deductive research approach, the theoretical framework for investigating lexico-grammatical patterns is determined at the outset of the research and the entire analysis is then conducted on this a priori basis. A different approach altogether has been to use statistical methods to locate systematic co-occurrence patterns of linguistic features and then identify the underlying discourse functions that give rise to such patterns of language use (e.g., Biber, 1988; Biber,

2006a; Gray, 2015). In this inductive analytical approach, communicative functions underlying co-occurrence patterns of linguistic features emerge from the analysis with no preconceived functional/discourse theory guiding their identification (more on this in the following sections).

Findings from this body of research have shown that the predominance of particular lexico-grammatical devices and their co-occurrence patterns in research writing is driven by certain social and contextual factors. Included in this view is an implicit understanding that recognizes research writing as a situated practice that cannot be simply described as a discrete act of the writer (see Pennycook, 1996; Prior, 1998). From this perspective, the texts created in the process of research writing are multi-faceted constructs, representing not only their author(s) but also the social and contextual characteristics of the situations within which they occur. For example, academic research articles, as a text category most representative of research writing, are often characterized by situational parameters such as the disciplinary field to which they belong, their type (theoretical or empirical), and their internal structure (see e.

g., Omidian & Siyanova-Chanturia, 2021). Such factors can potentially influence the linguistic choices authors make in the process of writing their research. For instance, social factors related to discipline-specific practices have been found to be the reason for the common use of noun compounding in sciences research writing (e.g., see Biber & Gray, 2016, p. 116; Halliday, 2004). There also appear to be contextual reasons why the use of passive constructions is frequent in writing particular sections of research articles (see

Biber & Finegan, 2001) or why the lexico-grammatical features of research writing in theoretical and empirical articles can be substantially different (see Gray, 2015, p. 176). The important corollary that follows from such evidence is that linguistic choices in research writing are unlikely to be made in isolation. Rather, they are often filtered through social and contextual assumptions associated with particular situational parameters. This in turn suggests that any characterization of language use in writing for research publication would need to be considered relative to such factors rather than in absolute terms.

In addition to situational factors, research writing practices could be also influenced by internal variables related to certain author characteristics. Research in this area has focused particularly on possible influences of writers’ mother-tongue status on their communicative practices in research writing. The main driving force behind this research agenda is the rapid globalization of research publishing in English (see Thomson-Reuters, 2012; Ware & Mabe, 2015) and the increasing pressure on non-Anglophone (henceforth LX1) researchers in many academic fields to publish in English-medium journals (see e.g., Canagarajah, 2002; Curry & Lillis, 2004; Luo

& Hyland, 2020; also see discussion in; Cargill & Burgess, 2017). More specifically, the dominance of English as the language of publishing in contemporary academia has raised the question of whether English as a first language (henceforth L1) authors have a head start in acquiring the literacy skills associated with writing for research publication purposes (see Flowerdew, 2013a; 2013b).

A considerable amount of research in this area has focused on investigating LX scholars’ perceptions of research writing in English, using qualitative assessments that typically draw on survey-based and ethnographic methods. Evidence from this body of research suggests that LX authors often experience some sense of inequality relative to their L1 peers when writing their research in English (see e.g., Hanauer & Englander, 2011; Lillis, Magyar, & Robinson-Pant, 2010; Olsson & Sheridan, 2012; Pérez-Llantada, 2014; also see;

Kubota, 2020). It has also been reported that LX scholars may find it particularly difficult to cope with the communicative demands and discourse conventions of writing certain sections of research articles (e.g., Introduction, Discussion; see Lillis & Curry, 2010; McDowell

& Liardét, 2019; Pérez-Llantada, Plo, & Ferguson, 2011). Such accounts of LX authors’ experiences have attracted scholarly interest to possible differences that may exist in research writing practices of L1 and LX authors (e.g., Flowerdew, 2013a, 2013b; also see; Curry &

Lillis, 2019). One form this research interest has rarely taken, however, is a systematic comparative analysis of language use in L1-LX

expert writing across key parts of research articles. While anecdotal evidence about L1-LX differences in expert research writing abound, little comparative linguistic data have been offered in evidence (see Hyland, 2019; also see; Curry & Lillis, 2019). The few studies that have compared patterns of language use in research articles written by L1 and LX academics have revealed systematic differences in the ways in which they fulfill various communicative functions (see e.g., Pan, Reppen, & Biber, 2016; ElMalik & Nesi,

2008; Martinez, 2018). For example, in a small-scale comparative study of research papers produced by L1 and LX scholars, ElMalik

and Nesi (2008) noted substantial differences in the realization of certain discourse functions (e.g., impersonalization) in the discussion section. These differences were marked by greater use of hedging and nominal phrases in Discussions produced by L1 authors,compared to those written by LX scholars. Similarly, Pan et al (2016) found considerable structural and functional differences in the multi-word items used by L1 and LX writers. These findings are important in that they indicate how scholars’ mother tongue status can influence their writing practices, and that identification of the linguistic profile of authors is a fundamentally important consideration for a linguistic study of writing for research publication in English (also see Lillis & Curry, 2016).

The above review of the literature on research writing shows that research in this area has adopted a diverse range of theoretical and empirical approaches to investigating the construct of writing for research publication, mapping its characteristics in different ways based on different analytical perspectives. Within this broad and diverse research area, however, studies conducted on the topic seem to be expressing a shared view of research writing as a complex activity influenced by various text-internal and text-external factors (also see Curry & Lillis, 2019; Lillis & Curry, 2016). From this view, taking account of the factors that intersect to engender this complexity is essential for gaining a rich understanding of language use in research writing. That is, comprehensive conclusions regarding the linguistic properties of research writing would need to be based on a multivariate approach that simultaneously accounts for multiple factors influencing discourse practices within this register.

Despite the large foundation of research into writing for research publication, very few studies to date have adopted such an approach to investigating the linguistic characteristics of this register (Gray, 2015). In general, previous research on research writing has mostly adopted a piecemeal approach to studying this register, often investigating the influence of a single factor on the use of either a particular communicative strategy (e.g., stance taking) or a few linguistic devices (see Gray, 2015; Lillis & Curry, 2016 for a comprehensive review). While no doubt valuable, such an approach fails to provide a comprehensive view of the inherently multidimensional nature of research writing. In addition, previous studies in this area have rarely included in their research design text-external factors related to linguistic profile of writers. As was mentioned earlier, taking account of both text-internal and text-external factors is fundamentally important for arriving at an in-depth understanding of research writing (see Lillis & Curry, 2016

for further discussion of the importance of multidimensionality in the study of writing for research publication). For this purpose, the present study sought to address the above gaps by investigating the linguistic characteristics of knowledge communication in research writing from multiple perspectives: disciplinarity, intra-textual variation, and L1 versus LX expert writing. These perspectives were used as the basis for creating a new multidimensional model of language use in this register. To this end, the functional dimensions associated with co-occurrence patterns of a wide range of linguistic features were identified using the inductive analytical approach developed by Biber, 1988. The following section provides a more detailed explanation of the methodology employed in this study.

2. Methodology

2.1. Corpus

The current study is based on a multidisciplinary corpus of research articles (c. 4.5 million words) published in high-ranking journals from ten different disciplinary fields (i.e., biology, chemistry, dentistry, mechanical engineering, physics, applied linguistics, business, management, politics, and sociology). The disciplines were selected based on their orientation toward either the hard sciences (biology, chemistry, dentistry, mechanical engineering, physics) or soft knowledge fields (applied linguistics, business, management, politics, and sociology). The disciplinary orientation of each field was determined with reference to the hard-soft distinction characterized in previous studies (see Biglan, 1973a; Durrant, 2017; Hyland, 2004; also see Omidian, Shahriari, &

Siyanova-Chanturia, 2018).

Arriving at an optimal design for a representative corpus of language use in a target domain should ideally follow two major methodological stages (see Biber & Egbert, 2016; Omidian & Siyanova-Chanturia, 2021):

i) conduct observational assessments of the target domain to identify the situational characteristics of the target texts ii) perform systematic sampling procedures to compile a representative sample of texts from the target domain The above methodological procedures can increase the generalizability of research findings, allowing the researcher to anchor the observed linguistic patterns in more robust theoretical interpretations. Although both of these procedures seem to be important in arriving at valid and verifiable linguistic results, most corpus-based studies often focus only on the second step (see McEnery & Hardie,

2012; Biber & Egbert, 2016). To arrive at an optimal design for the corpus used in the present study, careful consideration was given to both methodological procedures. In particular, it was necessary to identify the situational features characterizing the target texts (i.e., academic journal articles, see Biber & Conrad, 2009, Chapter: 2). As noted earlier, academic journal articles are characterized by parameters such as their type (e.g., empirical or theoretical) and their internal structure. Therefore, identification of such factors is a fundamentally important consideration for constructing a corpus that is intended to represent language use in research writing. The steps taken to systematically include such methodological considerations in the process of designing the corpus are described below.

As a first step, an inductive survey of high-ranking journals nominated by expert informants (based on their 5-year impact factor published by Thomson Reuters’ Web of Knowledge ISI) was conducted to identify the type of articles commonly published in each disciplinary field2. In order to determine their type, full-length articles in at least ten volumes of each journal were carefully examined based on the following characteristics (also see Omidian & Siyanova-Chanturia, 2021):

a) The inclusion of quantitative or qualitative data analyses

b) Presenting a model/formula that is analyzed and tested by means of various analytical procedures 

c) Focusing on theoretical aspects of the field without data inclusion

Articles that belonged to (a) and (b) were categorized as empirical articles, while those belonging to (c) were classified as theoretical articles. Since the objective of the project was to describe the lexico-grammatical characteristics of articles that included empirical data, theoretical articles were not included in the corpus. It is important to note that, in cases where the type of an article did not clearly fit into the above categories, the article in question was excluded from further consideration. For instance, in certain disciplines, such as physics and chemistry, writers often make theoretical arguments regarding the accuracy or validity of an established model (or formula) and present various data analyses to prove their point. Since such articles seem to have features of both theoretical and empirical studies, they do not readily fit into either category and, thus, were not included in the corpus.

As a second step, we carefully examined empirical articles in each discipline to determine their internal structures. Two main organizational patterns were identified: i. articles that included a unique and distinctive sectioning format and ii. papers that contained the content of a standard four-part organization (Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion; IMRD). For comparison and consistency purposes, empirical articles belonging to the former category were excluded from the sampling procedure. IMRD sections were identified based on section labels used by authors. That is, we did not rely on our own judgments for the identification of the sections.

Instead, we relied on the labels that authors deemed appropriate for the description of the content of each section of their articles. Thus, for example, the Introduction sections included in the soft sub-section of the corpus contained the type of content that authors in the soft fields deemed representative of Introductions in these fields (the same holds for all IMRD sections included in the corpus) .

Literature Reviews/background sections were not considered for inclusion in the corpus . This decision was based on the observation that most research articles in the sciences did not contain literature review sections (cf. Lin & Evans, 2012; see; Stoller & Robinson,

2013). Moreover, our analysis revealed that Results and Discussion (R&D) sections in empirical papers were either fully separated or integrated (also see Stoller & Robinson, 2013). Every effort was made to include only articles that contained fully separated R&D

sections. The rationale for this decision was that R&D sections typically fulfill distinct communicative purposes and perform different discourse functions in research articles (e.g., Lin & Evans, 2012; Swales, 2004). The difference in the communicative purposes of R&D

sections has the potential to give rise to systematic patterns of language use that can vary as a result of the sections’ communicative aims. Therefore, it is necessary to maintain the distinction between these two sections and acknowledge the significance of their distinct communicative purposes and discourse functions. In line with this reasoning, Conclusion sections were not treated as part of Discussions and those articles that contained integrated Discussion and Conclusion sections were not included in the corpus.

The third step in the sampling procedure was to verify the status of authors as either L1 or LX users of English. To distinguish between L1 written articles and those authored by LX writers, the method for authorship categorization proposed by Wood (2001) was used as a basis for our sampling procedure. Wood’s (2001) method is based on two criteria: broad and strict. While the ‘broad’ criterion takes the name of the first author to distinguish between L1 and LX written texts, the ‘strict’ criterion takes a step further by considering authors’ institutional affiliations as an additional differentiating factor. This sampling method has been widely used in many studies (e.

g., Hyland, 2016; Martinez, 2018; Peacock, 2002; Wood, 2001; Pan et al., 2016). For the present study, we took a rather conservative approach, systematically implementing the following steps to optimize the process of distinguishing between L1 and LX written articles:

a) Each author’s first and last names were examined

b) Each author’s institutional affiliation was examined and cross-checked against current correspondence address c) If (a) and (b) revealed that the article was multi-nationally authored, it was excluded from further consideration d) If (a) and (b) confirmed that the article was not multi-nationally authored, the corresponding author of the article was contacted via email, requesting clarification on the linguistic profile of the authors involved in drafting the manuscript e) If the corresponding author confirmed that all the authors whose names were listed in the article were native speakers of English, the article in question was considered for inclusion in the corpus as a L1 written article. Similarly, if the corresponding author confirmed that all the authors were non-native3 English speakers, the article was considered as a LX written article.

Figs. 1 and 2 provide examples of the articles that were included in the corpus as L1 and LX written papers. In contrast, Fig. 3 shows an example of multi-nationally authored articles that were excluded from further consideration.

In the final step, a stratified random sampling procedure was performed through which five articles were extracted from different issues of a journal in each year. Care was taken to extract an approximately equal number of articles from different journals in each field so as to preclude journal influences on writing style. Each extracted article was then carefully examined to ensure that it followed the criteria and operational definitions for article selection explained above. In addition, attention was paid to arrive at comparable word counts for the ten disciplines. Table 1 presents a description of the corpus analyzed in the present study.

2.2. Multi-dimensional analysis of research writing

The present study employed MD analysis to provide a multidimensional perspective on research writing. The steps taken to conduct the analysis are described briefly below (readers are referred to Biber, 1988, Chapters: 5–6; for a more detailed discussion).

As a first step in the analysis, the corpus was annotated for 148 linguistic features using the software developed in Biber (1988) and

Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999). In the second step, the normalized frequency counts of the tagged features were quantified using the associated TagCount program (see Biber, 1988, p. 75). In the third step of the analysis, the linguistic features that were suitable for inclusion in the final analysis were determined. Determining which linguistic variables to include in a MD analysis is important, as the success of the statistical procedure and the underlying functional dimensions that emerge from the analysis are contingent on the final set of features selected (see Biber, 2006a; Gardner, Nesi, & Biber, 2019; Gray, 2019). Principled decisions were made, based on the results of preliminary factor analysis runs, to avoid overlapping features and include those that could explain the greatest proportion of variance in the corpus. Fifty linguistic variables were retained for the final factor analysis (see Appendix A). The final factor analysis was then conducted with the selected features using 
the Principal Axis Factoring method. A four-factor solution was selected as optimal. This decision was based on the inspection of the scree plot of eigenvalues which showed a clear break between factors four and five (see Appendix B). The four factors accounted for 40.1 percent of the cumulative shared variance4. Factors were 

rotated using a Promax rotation, which resulted in minor correlations among the extracted factors. In the following section, we present the results of the MD analysis conducted in this study and discuss how the functional construct underlying each factor was interpreted through a detailed functional analysis of co-occurring features.

3. Results and discussion

3.1. Dimensions of variation in research writing

Table 2 presents the lexico-grammatical features defining three primary dimensions of variation in research writing5.

Detailed considerations of these features and their shared communicative functions provided the basis for the functional interpretation of the extracted factors as the following linguistic dimensions:

Dimension 1: Evaluative and elaborated versus informational discourse

Dimension 2: Conceptual and abstract versus concrete language

Dimension 3: Past-time procedural discourse

In the interpretation of a factor as a linguistic dimension, the communicative functions shared by the identified features are sought to explain the functional dimension underlying the factor in question. This is based on the premise that the communicative demands of texts (academic or non-academic) have the potential to give rise to systematic co-occurrence patterns of certain lexico-grammatical features (see, Biber, Egbert, & Keller, 2020). That is, co-occurrence patterns among linguistic devices are highly unlikely to be coincidental. Rather, they appear to be inextricably linked to communicative purposes and situational characteristics of texts.

The following sections discuss the details of these functional interpretations and the relations among texts with respect to each dimension.

3.2. Dimension 1: Evaluative and elaborated vs informational discourse

3.2.1. Interpretation of Dimension 1

Table 2 above shows that Dimension 1 comprises a wide range of linguistic features on the positive end of the factor and a few features with negative weights. The negative pole of Dimension 1 is very similar to those of previous MD studies (e.g., Biber, 1988;

Biber, 2006a). Four features loaded on the negative end of Dimension 1 (common nouns, pre-modifying nouns, past tense verbs, word length), two of which had larger weights on other factors (past tense verbs, word length; presented in [brackets] in Table 2). The co-occurrence of these features has been shown to reflect a high informational focus and the density of information in a text (see, e.g.,

Biber, 1988; Biber, 2006a). In expert research writing, nominal features, such as common nouns and pre-modifying nouns, afford the writer the opportunity to communicate a wealth of information by condensing it into few words (see, e.g., Biber & Gray, 2016).

Common nouns provide this opportunity by encompassing meanings from a wide and diverse array of semantic domains. Biber (2006a)classifies common nouns based on their meanings into eight major semantic categories: animate/human ( manager), concrete ( cylinder), technical ( ray), cognitive ( view), place ( middle), quantity ( frequency), group ( university), process/abstract ( function) nouns. Because they can fulfill a variety of semantic roles, common nouns are often the primary bearers of meaning and information in academic discourse (e.g., Biber & Gray, 2016, p. 114). Thus, the high frequency of common nouns in a text can be associated with communicative purposes that demand a high informational focus. Dimension 1 shows that these nouns are also often pre-modified (or qualified) by other nouns, resulting in multi-word combinations comprising two or more nouns (e.g., food safety management programs). The concatenation of nouns in this way enables authors to add additional layers of information to the meaning 
of the head noun with fewest words possible. Frequent use of such structural compressions often results in inexplicit expression of meaning and a dense packaging of information (see discussion in Biber & Gray, 2016, Chapter: 6). This process also directly contributes to the creation of technical terminologies and domain-specific meanings, which play a key role in the transmission of knowledge across academic disciplines. The following excerpt illustrates the use of these features in a text with a high negative score on Dimension 1: 1) Chemistry: Methods

The burner diameter was 50 mm surrounded by a 5 mm annular ring, also of sintered metal, providing an inert shield gas flow. A conical chimney with a 45-degree taper, whose base matched the burner diameter fed a steel tube. At the top of the chimney, a circular molybdenum ring held the mesh-supported catalyst within the post-flame gases. The flame equivalence ratio was varied, adjusting the fuel flow rate to the burner while maintaining the air flow at 115 SLPM. The flame gas composition was calculated with a chemical equilibrium code on the basis of the measured post-flame temperature, initial fuel identity, and the fuel-air equivalence ratio as inputs. Table 1 lists the fuels and fuel/air equivalence ratios for the flames studied here and the corresponding equilibrium gas compositions.

The primary positive features on Dimension 1 include modifiers (predicative adjectives, general adverbs), pronouns (pronoun ‘it’, demonstrative pronoun), verb be, present tense verbs, that-clauses controlled by stance adjectives , that-and to- clauses controlled by stance verbs, modals (possibility modals, necessity/obligation modals, prediction modals), and adverbial conjunctions. The majority of these features function together to provide a structure for conveying evaluations and stance meanings. For example, predicative adjectives tend to complement the copular be to present the author’s epistemic/attitudinal stance on the nominal element in subject position (e.g., the effect on antagonistic behavior is particularly strong) (see discussion in Biber et al., 1999, Section 5.5). These adjectives can also control complement clauses: to- clauses (e.g., such statements are more likely to shape) or that-clauses (e.g., it is conceivable that protein abduction). Both of these structures provide a frame for the 

expression of stance meanings (Biber, 2006b). Dimension 1 shows that texts in the corpus systematically varied with respect to the use of that-clauses controlled by stance adjectives. In academic writing, adjectives controlling that-clauses typically occur in extraposed constructions, where pronoun ‘it’ is the grammatical subject (see Gray

& Biber, 2015). Such structures allow writers to foreground their evaluative stance on the information presented in the following clause (for further discussion see Biber et al., 1999, Section 7.5; Biber, 2006a, Chapter 5). Excerpt 2–3 illustrates the co-occurrence patterns of these linguistic features:

2) Dentistry: Discussion

Despite this limitation, the power calculation was based on PD as the primary outcome of interest and we are confident that clinical comparisons between diabetes and non-diabetes subjects are valid whereas observations resulting from the subgroups analyses are less robust.

3) Sociology: Discussion

It is likely that the possibility of utilising these factors varies among young adults. For instance […]. However, it is possible that the results presented here could have been different if other poverty measures had been used.

Other clausal features with salient positive loadings on Dimension 1 are that-and to- clauses controlled by stance verbs (e.g., these constraints tend to, they contend that anxiety). Depending on the semantic domain of the controlling verb, these structures can convey various evaluative and stance meanings, including the author’s epistemic judgments, their views and arguments, and the amount of confidence they place in a proposition (see Biber, 2006b; Charles, 2006; Hyland, 2002a; Hyland & Tse, 2005). Similar to adjectival predicates, these verbal predicates can also take extraposed that- clauses (e.g., it seems that).

The positive end of Dimension 1 further indicates that texts in the corpus varied in the expression of stance through the use of modal verbs: possibility modals, prediction modals; necessity/obligation modals. Modals of possibility are used to indicate the possibility of an action (e.g., quantity of stereotypes could be used as) or to convey the author’s epistemic perspectives in a less direct and assured manner (e.g., assuming that students do perceive such support may be a mistake). Modals of prediction are employed to make (hypo-thetical) predictions that are often based on evaluations/judgments (e.g., more complex designs will essentially increase). Modals of necessity provide a frame to express the necessity or obligation of the forthcoming proposition (e.g., scientific political ideas should be considered within) (for further discussion of modality see Biber et al., 1999, p. 483).

Finally, adverbial conjunctions also co-occurred meaningfully with other features on the positive end of Dimension 1. Adverbial conjunctions serve to connect stretches of discourse, creating lexical cohesion and ensuring the logical flow of discussion (e.g., however, therefore). The statistical co-occurrence of this feature with the above stance devices on Dimension 1 seems to reflect the evaluative and discursive patterns of argument in texts with high scores on this dimension. Excerpt 4 illustrates these co-occurrence patterns in a text with a high positive score on Dimension 1:

4) Management: Discussion

Given the time savings involved, organizations might be able to interview more candidates by using a nonverbal medium. It is even possible that a written BDI could be used for e-recruitment, and then high-scoring candidates could be processed further […].

One potential consideration, however, is that the higher correlation with cognitive ability may make direct assessment of cognitive ability less viable. Regardless, included in such research should be an assessment of whether […]. However, if assessment of more maximal capabilities is the goal then a traditional BDI would not seem to be a good fit and a variation where interview constraints are relaxed might be more effective. […] We believe that finding effective intermediate points is very possible.

Excerpt 4 reflects the author’s attempt at structuring and presenting ideas and evaluations, as convincing and coherently organized arguments, using adverbial conjunctions and various stance and evaluative devices. The patterns of argument and reasoning in the above text sample can also be considered interactive, seeking to convince readers or turn their attention to the necessity of a proposition through the logical force of the argument. Clearly, the linguistic manifestations of this writer-reader interaction are not overtly interpersonal (cf. Biber, 1988, p. 105); Rather, they seem to conform to what is often referred to as ‘academic interactions’ (see Hyland,

2001; 2002b, 2004).

In sum, the patterns of language use shown in Excerpt 4 appear to be fundamentally different from those shown in Excerpt 1.

Considering both positive and negative features, Dimension 1 seems to distinguish communicative situations that require evaluations and elaborations from discourses with a high informational focus.

3.2.2. Register variation along Dimension 1

The results of an ANOVA (from the GLM procedure in SAS) showed that Dimension 1 was a significant and strong descriptor of register variation in research writing ( F = 129.3, p = . < 0001, R2 = .43)6. This variation is summarized in Fig. 4. Fig. 4 shows that Discussions written in the soft fields have very high mean scores on dimension 1, while Methods in the sciences are marked by low mean scores. This indicates that writing Discussions in soft knowledge fields is mostly associated with stance taking, evaluation, and elaboration, whereas the focus of the Methods section in the sciences is primarily informational. However, this dichotomy merely scratches the surface of the variation patterns revealed by Dimension 1. On closer inspection, it turns out that there are fundamental differences among IMRD sections with respect to the use of features loaded on Dimension 1, that these features are used to different degrees in hard and soft knowledge fields across the sections, and that there are subtle, yet important, differences between L1 and LX

expert writing across the four sections. Fig. 5 plots these differences.

The distribution of IMRD sections along dimension 1 show a dichotomous relationship between Methods and Discussion sections (see the left-hand side of Fig. 5). In comparison, Introduction and Results have relatively similar scores on this dimension. (These relations are further supported by the post-hoc comparisons reported in Appendix C; Table C.1) In general, it seems that the communicative purposes of the Discussion section demand a reliance on authorial stance, evaluation and elaboration, while the discourse of Methods is extremely impersonal and primarily focused on communicating factual information.

Continuing towards the middle of the plot (Fig. 5), we notice that these patterns are affected by disciplinary specificity. Most noticeable are the patterns of use for Introductions and Results, indicating that these sections in the soft fields are substantially more evaluative and elaborated compared to the hard sciences. Fig. 5 further shows that discussion of findings is the only part of the research article in which authors in the hard fields tend to heavily rely on evaluation and elaboration features. Post-hoc analysis showed that soft knowledge fields had significantly higher scores on Dimension 1 than the sciences across all the four sections, with the magnitude of these differences being the largest in Methods and Discussions (see Appendix C; Table C.2).

Finally, the right-hand side of Fig. 5 shows that the use of Dimension 1 features by L1 and LX expert writers is relatively comparable across all the sections except for Discussions. Interestingly, the patterns of variation revealed by Dimension 1 show that, compared to LX authors, L1 writers made significantly greater use of the positive Dimension 1 features when discussing the findings of their study (see Appendix C; Table C.3), suggesting a higher degree of evaluation and elaboration in the discussions written by these authors.

3.3. Dimension 2: Conceptual and abstract vs concrete language

3.3.1. Interpretation of Dimension 2

Dimension 2 consists of 11 positive and four negative features (Table 2). The primary positive features on this dimension include two classes of common nouns (cognitive and abstract/process nouns), nominalization, 3rd person pronouns, communication verbs, type/token ratio, and word length. Cognitive nouns are employed to convey meanings related to cognitive entities (e.g., perspective, judgement), typically referring to abstract concepts associated with human agents (see Gray, 2015, p. 91). Abstract/process nouns are used to refer to intangible processes and concepts (e.g., function, argument). Abstract nouns are also created through nominalization, a process through which meanings are decoupled from their verbal/adjectival realizations and reconstructed using nominal forms which often have no perceptual correlate (e.g., commitment, responsibility) (see, Biber & Gray, 2016; Halliday, 2004 for further discussion).

The co-occurrence of these nominal elements thus seems to signal a form of discourse primarily concerned with descriptions of concepts and abstract entities:

5) Applied Linguistics: Introduction

A historical look at the evolution of research on the notion of teacher thinking in mainstream education reveals that prior to the 1970s, this line of enquiry was primarily guided by the process-product conceptualization of teaching. Couched within this paradigm, teaching was primarily viewed in the light of the outcomes it produced.

6) Management: Discussion

We suggest that, as mature knowledge is being incorporated in an increasing number of innovations, they lose their novelty.

Therefore, inventors are better off leveraging that knowledge before […]. This entails monitoring the pace of knowledge adoption in the industry. Consideration of the distance and adoption contingencies can.

Arguments in the above text samples are conveyed through the author’s careful selection of abstract nouns that are very specific in meaning. Dimension 2 shows that texts with high frequency of use of these nouns are also marked by diverse lexical choices and long words (as indicated by type/token ratio and word length). A high degree of lexical diversity reflects a precise and careful selection of vocabulary (see discussion in Jarvis, 2013). The frequent use of long words also implies the reliance of these texts on specific meanings: longer words are often more precise in meaning than shorter words (Zipf, 1949). The co-occurrence of these features indicates that texts with high positive scores on Dimension 2 are characterized by precise choices of value-laden words used to describe conceptual and abstract entities.

Communication verbs also have a salient positive loading on Dimension 2. Academic verbs of communication are typically used to discuss and communicate abstract concepts such as arguments or claims put forth by individuals (e.g., argue, discuss, suggest, state) (see

Biber, 2006b; Hyland, 2001). The co-occurrence of these lexical verbs with the abstract nouns discussed above can be seen as representing discoursal practices concerned with developing conceptual understanding of abstract entities and arguments. These co-occurrence patterns are illustrated in the following excerpt from a text with a high score on Dimension 2: 7) Business: Introduction

The pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunities is at the heart of entrepreneurship. While there are many activities associated with opportunity pursuit, judgments and decisions have been documented as fundamental to the process. […] Cognitive science research indicates that one’s past inaction decisions can produce downstream effects when it comes to the judgments and decisions that follow. In line with this, anecdotal evidence suggests such dynamics in entrepreneurs’ decision making, as well-regarded entrepreneurs like Amazon founder Jeff Bezos frequently discuss past inaction decisions as a factor in how they think about potential opportunities today.

In contrast, the negative end of Dimension 2 highlights a form of discourse that rarely involves descriptions of abstract theoretical concepts, and instead relies on explanation of concrete and demonstrable evidence through frequent use of concrete and quantity nouns (e.g., cylinder, temperature), which are also often expanded upon through prepositional phrases (e.g., rays at different angles). The following excerpt illustrates the discourse of texts with high negative scores on Dimension 2:

8) Dentistry: Results

The control resin and Dycal showed increasing trends in weight loss over time. No significant differences were found in the weight loss of the experimental material amongst all end-points, whereas MTA had a weight increase (percentage weight variation 0) over time. […] In addition, the pH values of the soaking water of the experimental material and MTA did not differ significantly at any time-point except at day 1.

The negative pole of Dimension 2 thus appears to highlight communicative practices that focus on concrete presentation of information, placing emphasis on describing particularities of research objects rather than explicating theoretical concepts.

3.3.2. Register variation along Dimension 2

Figs. 6–7 show that the functional construct underlying Dimension 2 is strongly correlated with how disciplines present scholarly knowledge in sections of research articles ( F = 183.5, p = . < 0001, R2 = .51). At one level, the patterns of variation revealed by Dimension 2 point to some differences across IMRD sections. It can be seen from Figs. 6–7 that Introduction and Discussion sections have higher scores than Methods and Results. Given the strong focus of these sections on explaining and establishing abstract concepts (see e.g., Swales, 1990, 2004), it might be expected that Introductions and Discussions frequently use the features grouped on the positive pole of Dimension 2. However, it turns out that these distributions are strongly affected by disciplinary preferences. Figs. 6–7

show that the IMRD sections with positive scores on Dimension 2 are all written in the soft disciplines, suggesting that writing these sections in soft knowledge fields is characterized by patterns of argument that primarily focus on describing conceptual and abstract entities. In contrast, all sections with negative scores on Dimension 2 belong to the hard sciences, indicating inherent variation in the language of these sections across hard and soft fields. Post-hoc analyses showed that hard and soft fields significantly differed in their use of Dimension 2 features in each of the four sections (see Appendix C; Table C.4).

With respect to possible variation between L1 and LX expert writing, the emerged patterns showed no significant differences between the two groups of writers in their use of the features grouped on Dimension 2. This is further supported by the results of post-hoc comparisons reported in Appendix C (Table C.5).

3.4. Dimension 3: Past-time procedural discourse

3.4.1. Interpretation of Dimension 3

The positive end of Dimension 3 is characterized by the use of eight features, two of which were found to have larger weights on other dimensions (communication verbs and 3rd person pronouns). The negative end of this dimension consists of only two features (attributive adjectives and word length), one of which loaded with a larger weight on another dimension (word length). And thus, the negative pole of Dimension 3 is primarily characterized by the relative absence of the positive features on this dimension.

The primary positive features on Dimension 3 include agentless passives, two classes of lexical verbs (activity and aspectual verbs), time adverbials, and past tense verbs. Agentless passives are used to give prominence to the grammatical patient of the verb and minimize the role of the agent (e.g., samples were immobilized onto). The co-occurrence of agentless passives with activity verbs (e.g., combine, apply) seems to reflect communicative practices that center on explaining physical activities and procedures, rather than focusing on the performer of the actions. Aspectual verbs (e.g., start, complete) are commonly used to describe stages of progress and sequencing of a given activity or event (see Biber et al. 1999, pp. 364, 372). Time adverbials are used for temporal reference, marking the timing of events, actions and processes (e.g., the data was then imported inside a). Finally, the frequent use of past tense verbs is attributed to discoursal practices that incorporate narrations of past events and happenings. The co-occurrence of these features is illustrated in the following excerpt from a text with a high positive score on Dimension 3:

9) Chemistry: Method

Assays were started by the addition of the alcohol oxidase solution and then incubated in a water bath at 30 C. After 10 min, 200 L

of a freshly prepared 5 mg/mL Purpald solution in 05 N NaOH was added, and the samples were vigorously vortexed to ensure oxygenation. After an additional 30 min at 30 C, the samples were removed from the water bath and 06 mL of HO was added for a final volume of 10 mL. Absorbance at 550 nm was then determined. Methanol concentrations were determined from a standard curve between 0 and 50 nmol of methanol. Thin slices (1–2 mm) of green bean pods and tomato pericarp were prepared using a sharp knife.

Taken together, it appears that the co-occurrence patterns among the positive features on Dimension 3 mark a form of discourse concerned with the narration of procedures, analytical steps, and specific research-related activities, conveying aspects of methodology and sequences of events with the implied performer of the actions being the researcher.

3.4.2. Register variation along Dimension 3

Figs. 8–9 show that Methods written in the sciences are characterized by their highly procedural discourse. Methods in the soft fields also have moderately high scores on this dimension, indicating that writing these sections in the soft fields relies on procedural discourse features, but to a lesser extent compared to the sciences (see Fig. 9). The results of post-hoc comparisons showed that Methods sections in the sciences had a significantly higher Dimension 3 mean scores compared to those in the soft fields (see

Appendix C; Table C.6). This distribution probably reflects a particular emphasis on providing a detailed and accurate description of procedures and analytical steps in the sciences.

Results sections have intermediate values on Dimension 3, suggesting that writing these sections may also rely on some of the positive features on this dimension (e.g., past-tense verbs). At the negative extreme, Introductions in both hard and soft fields are characterized by the near total absence of positive Dimension 3 features (see Fig. 9), suggesting that communicative practices in these sections rarely involve procedural narrations. Discussions in both domains also have moderately low scores on this dimension.

Finally, Dimension 3 shows no substantial difference between L1 and LX authors in their use of the features grouped on this dimension (see Appendix C; Table C.7).

Altogether, the linguistic function underlying Dimension 3 appears to not only distinguish the discourse of Methods from those of other sections but also highlight disciplinary specificity in fulfilling the communicative purposes of this section.

3.5. Synthesis

In the previous sections, we provided descriptions of the three dimensions and showed that they are separate in terms of their linguistic characterizations and the functional construct they represent. We have also briefly considered the characterization of register categories with respect to each dimension. However, characterizing registers based on any of the three dimensions in isolation would potentially result in an incomplete description of their situational characteristics (see discussion in Biber, 1986; Biber, 1988, p. 164).

Consider the description of IMRD sections with respect to the three dimensions, for example. Dimension 3 shows that Methods sections are characterized by their highly narrative, procedural discourse. However, looking back at the patterns of results revealed by Dimension 1, we find that the discourse of Methods sections is also marked for having a high informational focus. Thus, if the characterization of Methods sections was considered only in terms of one dimension, the description of their situational characteristics would be incomplete.

Fig. 10 summarizes the results of our MD analysis for IMRD sections by plotting the mean score of each section against the overall corpus mean with respect to the three dimensions. The plotted patterns show that Introduction sections have scores above and below the average for Dimension 2 (conceptual vs concrete) and Dimension 3 (past-time procedural), respectively. Mean scores for Methods are substantially below the corpus mean for Dimension 1 (evaluative and elaborated vs informational), and above the average for Dimension 3. Results sections have relatively intermediate scores for Dimension 1 and 3, but they are markedly below the average score along Dimension 2. And finally, Discussions are marked by their high mean scores on Dimension 1.

On the basis of these results, it is possible to provide a preliminary typology of research writing in IMRD sections with respect to the three dimensions and their corresponding linguistic features. This characterization is presented in Table 3.

However, while such a functional characterization can provide useful insights into writing across sections of research articles, it does not account for the impact of disciplinarity on research writing in these sections. The results reported in the previous sections show that distribution patterns of IMRD sections are strongly influenced by disciplinary specificity across all three dimensions. Taking the mean dimension score of each section as a benchmark, Fig. 11 allows for a comparison of these patterns with respect to the three dimensions.

Fig. 11 shows that, on Dimension 1, Introductions in the soft fields are characterized by their evaluative and elaborated discourse, while these sections in the hard fields typically have an informational focus. In addition, only the Introductions written in the soft fields are marked as being highly conceptual and abstract (Dimension 2), suggesting that the discourse characteristics of these sections can considerably vary depending on disciplinary preferences. For Methods, while the discourse of these sections in the sciences can be characterized as being highly informational (Dimension 1), event-driven/concrete (Dimension 2), and procedural (Dimension 3), such a characterization does not seem to be very well-suited for describing the prose style of Methods in the soft fields. Similar disciplinary influences can be found by looking at the patterns shown for Results sections: these sections in the soft disciplines have positive scores on both Dimensions 1 and 2, which contradicts the patterns shown for the sciences and the overall mean scores of Results sections along these two dimensions. This suggests that the characterization proposed in Table 3 may not prove accurate for describing the discourse of Results in soft knowledge fields, and that writing these sections in such fields, as opposed to the hard fields, may also rely on evaluation/elaboration and description of conceptual, abstract entities. Finally, Discussion sections in the hard disciplines have a considerably lower mean score on Dimension 1, compared to the overall mean score of these sections on this dimension. Moreover, the patterns shown for Discussions along Dimension 2 suggest that discussion of findings in the sciences often involves explanation of concrete evidence rather than interpretation of theoretical constructs (as is often the case in Discussions written in soft knowledge fields). This implies that discussion of research findings in sciences writing, in comparison to writing in the soft fields, is more empiricist and less interpretative in nature. Altogether, the patterns plotted in Fig. 11 indicate that describing the situational characteristics of research writing across IMRD sections with no consideration given to possible disciplinary influences could result in tentative conclusions at best.

In addition to investigating the role of disciplinarity and intratextuality in research writing, the present study explored L1-and LX-English scholars’ writing practices across sections of research articles. The results of our MD analysis showed that only one dimension was significantly associated with systematic differences between L1 and LX expert writing. Specifically, discussions written by L1-English authors showed higher positive mean scores than those written by LX-English writers on Dimension 1. As noted earlier, the functional construct underlying the positive pole of this dimension can be described as being associated with discourse practices primarily concerned with evaluation and elaboration. Our finding suggests that there are considerable differences between L1 and LX

expert writing in the Discussion section, especially with respect to fulfilling the communicative practices related to the evaluation and elaboration of research findings. Previous research has shown that the Discussion section is characterized by rhetorical purposes that involve interpretation, elaboration, and validation of research findings, with the aim of convincing the reader to assent to a particular knowledge claim (e.g., Basturkmen, 2009; Swales & Feak, 2012; Yang & Allison, 2003). Lillis and Curry (2010) found that fulfilling such rhetorical functions is particularly challenging to non-Anglophone authors, and that these authors often find writing Discussion sections more difficult as compared with other sections such as Methods (also see McDowell & Liardét, 2019; Pérez-Llantada et al.,

2011 for similar observations). While we caution against interpreting the evidence presented here from a perspective of LX deficiency or difficulty, our results suggest that the nuances of writing Discussions and the communicative demands associated with evaluation and elaboration of research findings have the potential to shed light on important differences in research writing practices of L1-and LX-English scholars. We argue that such comparative data can put anecdotal evidence on L1-LX differences in expert writing into a more empirical perspective and validate assumptions underpinning such a dichotomy (also see Curry & Lillis, 2019; Hyland, 2016).

4. Conclusion

Scholarly knowledge in contemporary academia is created and communicated primarily through writing for research publication.

This particular form of knowledge dissemination takes place on a global scale in today’s academia. It is now almost a truism to say that the vast majority of scholarly activities related to knowledge creation and its circulation in the modern academic system have close ties to research writing. Due to its distinct linguistic characteristics and discourse conventions, this form of writing has been known to pose 

great challenges to researchers, especially those at the beginning stages of their scholarly career. The present study set out to investigate the linguistic characteristics of knowledge communication in research writing from multiple perspectives. For this purpose, a multivariate approach was adopted to develop a new multidimensional model of research writing based on three main factors: disciplinarity, intra-textual variation, and L1 versus LX expert writing. Our analysis revealed three fundamental dimensions: ‘Evaluative and elaborated discourse vs. Informational focus’, ‘Conceptual and abstract vs. concrete language’, and ‘past-time procedural discourse’. Our results further showed that these particular dimensions have the potential to provide detailed descriptions of linguistic relations among main sections of research articles. It was also found that the linguistic co-occurrence patterns defining these functional dimensions can be strongly affected by disciplinary preferences, and that any 

characterization of research writing with no careful consideration given to such factors would be incomplete. The results also showed that the first Dimension of variation identified in the present study could distinguish between writing practices of L1-and LX-English scholars. Based on this finding, we argued that the functional parameters underlying this dimension (i.e., evaluation and elaboration) could provide a useful starting point for future studies of L1-LX expert writing.

In sum, linguistic characteristics and communicative functions defining writing for research publication are generally multi-faceted in nature. Thus, we argue that comprehensive conclusions concerning the discourse characteristics of this genre of writing would need to be based on linguistic and functional analyses that consider multiple variables influencing language use in this register. Future research could adopt the multivariate approach used in the present study to shed further light on the use of English for research publication purposes. Future studies could also incorporate different types of academic journal articles into the multidimensional model developed here to examine whether, and to what extent, discourse functions underlying different text varieties within this register differ with respect to the proposed functional dimensions.

